# An Introduction of RSI, Bollinger Bands & Divergence for Starting Market Analysts. #

The two analyses methods used for market evaluations are 1). Traditional
or Fundamental &.2). Technical

## Traditional Analysis

The fundamental analysis is the easy one of the two, which evaluates and
creates comparable ratios of the tangible (monetary value of the assets)
and intangibles (like brand name, royalties, patents) properties of the
firm represented by the ticker symbol. The fundamental analysis tries to
foresee for a long time the trend of the trades & businesses of the
company.

Traditional methods are many, but the commons ones are:

1.P/E Ratio (Price-to-Earnings Ratio)

2.Earnings Per Share.

3.PEG Ratio. (Price-to-Earnings Ratio)

4\. Book Value.

5.Return on Equity.

6.Free Cash Flow.

7\. Net Assets.

## Technical analysis

Technical analysis is, on the other hand, all about statistical and
business mathematical analysis, not directly related to the performance,
assets or the trade of the entity under study. It tries quantifying the
qualitative opinions of market operators about the share price.

## Comparing both

An interesting link between Technical and Traditional is, there is one
additional traditional method of evaluating the share price is getting
the opinion or recommendation of the experienced one. The technical
analysis is trying to put a definite number for the opinion of the
market by analyzing it statistically. While fundamental analysis can
cause industry shifts by pointing the strength and the weakness of the
industry the firm is in, while technical analysis narrowly focuses only
on skim profit out of these shifts.

## Practical Use of these Analyses

Though the technical analysis tools are relatively new, by practical
use, they both have their equally important places. The main purpose of
these analyses is providing a balance between the profit & risk,
especially within the scope or the comfort feeling of the individual
investor. For investments needs long-term fund creating, fundamental
analysis makes more sense. In short term or income generating
investments, the technical analysis is particularly important. Yet they
both are not two poles apart like North-South; a short-term investor may
reside under the hood of a pension fund, a long-term investment entity,
when he functions as a fund manager. At the starting levels, an analyst
is better off by widely looking at which of the analyses to select and
which tools to use, rather than being misguided by in depth analysis of
one tool.

## Value of these Analyses in share values

As Johnny has said in class, Mr. Gates did not do any of these analyses
to become the world's richest man. So, then we have the question of why
& who needs these analyses. Though these analyses have no formula to
make another Larry or Bill like stars, which is the dream our
subconscious minds, they try to ensure the investors can make a modest
living out of their investments by using these tools. The likelihood is
the two analyses can generate a remuneration for those who are employed
in that, but enjoying any supernormal profit is not expectable as these
techniques are common tools in the market. Encountered by these
problems, we attempt to introduce more complex tools to foresee beyond
and above any doubts remaining in the investing.

The well-known maxim is that there is no profit without risk. The theory
is analysis cannot remove the risk completely. Nevertheless, technical
analysis hopes to avoid any risk taking. So, if the technical analysis
reaches its perfection or saturation point and the market is also fully
automated and only computers take decisions without human intervention,
then there would not be any scope for short term profit making on the
market, only long-term investments would make sense. An analyst thus
having set the purpose of his investment, understands the nature of the
market, then evaluates the abilities of the techniques and the tool to
select his job.

## What to buy or sell? the billion-dollar question!

For long term investments, a portfolio constructed with carefully
selected with negatively correlated shares can fulfill much of the
expectation. A government or municipal bond is risk free, steady,
guaranteed income source. S & P 500 companies are shifted performers in
the market, in their fields. Investing in them is less complex, even
less risky. Putting money on them is not gambling. Their aspects are
covered well by fundamental analysis tools. The short-term investment is
the space where one plays more with the risk and expects something
beyond and above normal remuneration. That is where the heated question
of what to buy & when to sell it and vice versa exist. The two basic
tools of technical analysis are 1.) mean and 2). standard deviation of
the price changes, or the daily income of a share. The price changes of
a share are similar to the calculable daily interest of a loan that the
investor can get by lending the same amount of money. Interest is a
foreseeable income from a loan or bond, so to compare a share price with
it, (moving) average price is used with (plus or minus two) standard
deviation.

## Teething problem of the technical Analysis in action

We know that the short-term investor is not too much concerned about the
stretch of the long future. For Example, he/she is not interested in
when the crypto currencies are going out of market or what the new
industry Tesla is going to jump into, next year. They are interested in
buying where the prices have fallen to low and selling them back at when
the prices are high. This necessarily speculates the price movement of
shares. Moving average and standard deviation are good particularly in
enlightening the matters of the past, but they do not accurately predict
what would happen in the future. Though the standard deviation can show
some accuracy here, the average price cannot. With these tools, arriving
at what would be the price of a share after three months, is difficult.
The growth factor or declining factor associated with the share price is
not assimilated in the moving average's one day price though it is
present in a plotted graph. Extrapolating a moving average of a share
price to the future is complex.

We know that mathematically it is easy to embed a growth factor on the
forecast of a share when the share price observes a linear pattern or
even a quadratic parabolic pattern. But the securities' price changes
are not compliant or closer to any mathematical pattern. Further the
short-term investor likes to hold the shares as long as their prices go
up and wants to sell as soon as the price downturn starts. It is in this
'gloomy situation RSI comes as a handy torch.

## RSI & Bollinger Bands, the helping hand

RS is the ratio of 14days gains divided by losses acquired within the
same 14 days period of a share. To produce the RSI from RS, the ratio is
inverted after adding with one and multiplied by 100 and deducted from
100. This always produces a figure between 0 to 100. If the result is
50, then in that interval (14 days) period, their share did not gain or
lose any value. 70 is the limit where it is assumed over-selling starts
to take place and 30 is the limit where underselling stoppes. Bollinger
Band is congruent with this result. Bollinger Band are the two-lines
travel along with the moving average, up and down two standard
deviations, away. So, these two-line bands cover all the 95% of the
price possibilities. But if the price exceeds this 95% it is visible in
the RSI graph. Because the RSI indicator will be definitely between
0-100 it is easier to study RSI in graph, in relation to the high or low
swing price variation of the share. Any price that went above or under
Bollinger bands falls above or under the 70-30 marks of RSI. Most of the
time it is unlikely that we can have the RSI & Bollinger Bands on the
same graph with the same scales, but they can be plotted on the same
graph under different Y axis scales. This gives a chance to observe
convergence & divergence of the graphs.

## The answer to the question

That helps the short-term investor to make his/her decision to buy and
sell. When the prices are above 2 STD and higher high is present in the
price graph, but RSI is just below 70 and starts with a downward trend,
that means the prices had hit the highest and they are about on a
downward trend to fall. This is where the investor wants to sell his
holding and realize the short-term profit. The vice versa on the lower
end to indicate the future increase of the prices. The investor can
react to the price changes and invest on additional shares. RSI Is used
in a more in-depth manner, that is irrelevant for our project, so we
stop here to start the project presentation.
